vikrant-data-modeling-cover-blog (#57)
vendia/blog: posts/2022-01-14-construct-vendia-univseral-application-using-domain-driven-design.md

> # Construct Vendia Universal Application using Domain Driven Design

Reviewer: Can you work with TZ and Caroll on the title?  Something like "Applying Domain Driven Design to Blockchains" or "4 DDD Patterns for your Next Distributed Ledger".

Author: I will resolve all the changes requested, take an export of blog readme and send it over to TZ and Carrol to suggest a title.

> # Construct Vendia Universal Application using Domain Driven Design

Author: I will consult with TZ and Carrol on title suggestions.

> Vendia Share is a data platform that you can use to quickly build real-time data sharing applications, which we call Universal Applications (or "Unis" for short). You can build both internal and external applications on Vendia Share. Internal applications include applications that you need for enterprise data management - transactional, analytical, and master data. External applications include applications for data exchange across trust boundaries between partners or a consortium. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vendia Share is a platform that you can use to quickly build real-time data sharing applications, which we call Universal Applications (or "Unis" for short). 
```

Reviewer: I don't believe the Internal vs. External distinction here is critical to include.  Going for brevity here given the good stuff that follows in later sections.

> Vendia Share is a data platform that you can use to quickly build real-time data sharing applications, which we call Universal Applications (or "Unis" for short). You can build both internal and external applications on Vendia Share. Internal applications include applications that you need for enterprise data management - transactional, analytical, and master data. External applications include applications for data exchange across trust boundaries between partners or a consortium. 

Author: As suggested by James,  I removed the internal and external applications to keep it short for the good stuff that will come later.

> Data models power Vendia Share.  The schema-first approach makes it easy to deploy and operate a Uni. In fact, deploy and operate are almost indistinguishable steps after you have a ready-to-deploy schema. Vendia Share provides you with a GraphQL API that you can use to read and write data into Vendia Share and it also generates an immutable log of all transactions. Because a data model is a critical piece needed to create a Uni, designing the right data model for your application is an essential step to use Vendia Share. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data models power Vendia Share.  The schema-first approach makes it easy to design and create a Uni. In fact, design and create are almost indistinguishable steps after you have a ready-to-deploy schema. Vendia Share provides you with a GraphQL API that you can use to read and write data into Vendia Share and it also generates an immutable log of all transactions. Because a data model is a critical piece needed to create a Uni, designing the right data model for your application is an essential step to use Vendia Share. 
```

> Data models power Vendia Share.  The schema-first approach makes it easy to deploy and operate a Uni. In fact, deploy and operate are almost indistinguishable steps after you have a ready-to-deploy schema. Vendia Share provides you with a GraphQL API that you can use to read and write data into Vendia Share and it also generates an immutable log of all transactions. Because a data model is a critical piece needed to create a Uni, designing the right data model for your application is an essential step to use Vendia Share. 

Author: accepted, changes committed.

> In this blog, you will first go through a primer on Domain Driven Design(DDD), and then you will learn how to apply DDD when constructing a Uni. As a developer, you don’t have to learn a different design approach to build strategic applications on the Vendia Share platform. DDD is a popular and proven approach to designing and modeling systems that are strategic for your business. You can use the same concepts to design and model Uni(s). DDD is not a prerequisite to building Uni but it does help to create better software design. If DDD is new to you, you may benefit from reading Eric Evans' [book](https://www.domainlanguage.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/DDD_Reference_2015-03.pdf). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog, you will first go through a primer on Domain Driven Design (DDD) and then you will learn how to apply DDD when constructing a Uni. As a developer, you don’t have to learn a different design approach to build strategic applications on the Vendia Share platform. DDD is a popular and proven approach to designing and modeling systems that are strategic for your business. You can use the same patterns to design and model Vendia Share Unis. DDD is not a prerequisite to building Uni but it does help to create a better Uni. If DDD is new to you, you may benefit from reading Eric Evans' [book](https://www.domainlanguage.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/DDD_Reference_2015-03.pdf). 
```

> In this blog, you will first go through a primer on Domain Driven Design(DDD), and then you will learn how to apply DDD when constructing a Uni. As a developer, you don’t have to learn a different design approach to build strategic applications on the Vendia Share platform. DDD is a popular and proven approach to designing and modeling systems that are strategic for your business. You can use the same concepts to design and model Uni(s). DDD is not a prerequisite to building Uni but it does help to create better software design. If DDD is new to you, you may benefit from reading Eric Evans' [book](https://www.domainlanguage.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/DDD_Reference_2015-03.pdf). 

Author: accepted and applied change

> ## Primer on Domain Driven Design(DDD)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Primer on Domain Driven Design (DDD)
```

Author: resolved

> DDD is a popular software design approach for architecting and designing software using a top-down approach. DDD is a valuable exercise because it creates a common language that binds business and software. Requirements are dynamic in nature, they are good in defining activities, behaviors, rules, and actors. But, the data models built on requirements are fragile. DDD domain data models are static in nature and bring stability to data models, DDD is good in defining information that includes - its structure and relationships. DDD domain models delimit(set boundaries) and refine(make it precise) requirements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DDD is a popular top-down approach to software architecture and design. DDD is a valuable exercise because it creates a common language that binds business and technology. Requirements are dynamic in nature, they are good in defining activities, behaviors, rules, and actors. But, the data models built on requirements are fragile. DDD domain models are static in nature and bring stability to data models, DDD is good in defining information that includes - its structure and relationships. DDD domain models delimit (i.e. set boundaries) and refine requirements (i.e. make them precise). 
```

Here are a few terms with examples that you will commonly use to discuss DDD. 

* **The Domain** is effectively an arbitrary boundary around some subset of concepts in the business. It is subjective and concepts in a domain are not mutually exclusive. You can further break down the business into Sub-Domains until you find the smallest functional unit that is autonomous. For example, Customer Relationship Management(CRM) and Loyalty are two different domains in the e-Commerce business. Further CRM will have sub-domains responsible for managing customer accounts, customer profile, etc. and Loyalty will have dub-domains such as memberships, rewards, etc. 

> * **Bounded Context**, has a one-one relationship with sub-domains. The sub-domain is the problem space(business) and the bounded context is the solution space(software). Bounded context is autonomous and has its own independent data models and architecture. It is where business meets the software systems. In the microservice world, a bounded context defines the maximum granularity of a service boundary. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Bounded Context**, has a one-to-one relationship with sub-domains. The sub-domain is the problem/business space and the bounded context is the solution/technical space. Bounded context is autonomous and has its own independent data models and architecture. It is where business meets the software systems.
```

Reviewer: I don't think microservices are relevant here.

* **Scalars** are primitive data types such as phone number, email, etc. 
* **Aggregates** are collections of Entities and Scalars. For example, the customer profile used by marketing is a combination of multiple entities such as customer demographics, order history, service requests, social activity, etc. Aggregates also have a top unique identifier called root entity reference. Often you will see aggregates referred to as a root entity.  For example, a customer profile will have a customerId as a root entity reference. 

There are various ways in which you can come up with boundaries for your domains and sub-domains in your organization. You can use linguistics analysis, SME knowledge, business process, and business activity analysis. For better intuition on domains and sub-domains refer to generic domain modeling for retail e-commerce businesses. Figure 1 below describes a generic domain model of an e-Commerce business with domain boundaries and sub-domains inside it.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029034-fce0bc26-ac2b-4a0b-8034-839832160749.png" />
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 1 - eCommerce example domain model</p>

> ## Business meets Software

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Business Meets Software
```

> In the real world where everything is software with an existing install base, it is very hard to define a DDD bounded context. The way the business is organized and the way technology is implemented may not align well. In such cases, it becomes a three-legged race. It is more art than science. You can come up with several DDD models. But, the model that will prove useful is the one that will remove bottlenecks to improve software time to market and to service the core use case of the domain.

Reviewer: I think you can delete this intro paragraph. The second paragraph directly links from the title of this section.

Bounded Context is where the business meets software. Inside a bounded context, we go deep into the software architecture of an independent and autonomous business function and try to identify data aggregates, service boundaries for core use cases, and event definition for cross-domain synchronization. Figure 2 describes the Bounded Context Reference Architecture. 

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029167-ac2d28b7-7861-4790-a972-5a7a0ea50156.png" />
</p>

> <p align="center">Figure 2 - Bounded Context Reference Architecture</p>

Reviewer: @brian-vendia  - Did we land on a style convention for captions?  I've been doing  - centered, **Figure X** - _The Description_.   Happy to adopt whatever we'd like the norm to be.

Listed below are best practices for building services and data models for a bounded context.

> * The aggregate is composed of multiple Entities and Value Objects(singletons without unique identifiers). Try not to pack more than 3 Aggregates in a service boundary. 

Reviewer: Either Aggregate, Entity, and Value Object should be capitalized everywhere or nowhere.  I overcapitalize so will defer to @brian-vendia on our style guidance for these.

* An aggregate defines a transaction consistency boundary around one or more entities.
* An aggregate has a top-level entity called a root entity. Lookup on aggregate records is done using the root entity identifier. Any other entities in the aggregate are children of the root and are referenced using pointers. 
* A service should not be larger than a bounded context, and it should not be smaller than an aggregate. 
* For cross-domain data sync with external systems, use an async eventing system in your organization.

Hopefully, this gives you a good introduction or refresher on DDD. Next, we develop an understanding of Uni structure, terms, and concepts. 

## Uni Development Lifecycle

> Uni is a cross-cloud, cross-party, cross-account, cross-region data and code sharing application powered by Vendia's serverless distributed ledger technology. A uni is composed of [nodes](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#node) modeling [participants](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#participants), each of which possesses an ordered, replicated data model in the form of a distributed [ledger](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#ledger).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A [Uni](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#uni) is a cross-cloud, cross-party, cross-account, cross-region data and code sharing application powered by Vendia's serverless distributed ledger technology. A Uni is composed of [nodes](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#node) modeling [participants](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#participants), each of which possesses an ordered, replicated data model in the form of a distributed [ledger](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#ledger).
```

> Uni is a cross-cloud, cross-party, cross-account, cross-region data and code sharing application powered by Vendia's serverless distributed ledger technology. A uni is composed of [nodes](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#node) modeling [participants](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#participants), each of which possesses an ordered, replicated data model in the form of a distributed [ledger](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#ledger).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uni is a cross-cloud, cross-party, cross-account, cross-region data and code sharing application powered by Vendia's serverless distributed ledger technology. A uni is composed of [nodes](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#node) modeling [participants](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#participants), each of which possesses an ordered, replicated distributed [ledger](https://www.vendia.net/docs/share/terms-and-definitions#ledger) that originates from a data model.
```

> A Uni software development life cycle has five stages: Model, Design, Deploy, Operate, and Scale. Since a Uni is serverless, deployment, operations, and scaling are easy. Once you have the schema design, deployment is just a couple of clicks, and operations are handled by Vendia.  Vendia is responsible for scalability and performance. This leaves us with data modeling and design. Data models are the core of any software. In Uni, the design phase involves constructing a schema that is a deployable artifact and leads to the creation of Uni. In this blog, we will focus on data modeling and design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Uni software development life cycle has five stages: Model, Design, Create, Operate, and Scale. Since a Uni is serverless, deployment, operations, and scaling are easy. Once you have the schema design, deployment is just a couple of clicks, and operations are handled by Vendia.  Vendia is responsible for scalability and performance. This leaves us with data modeling and design. Data models are the core of any software. In Uni, the design phase involves constructing a schema that is a deployable artifact and leads to the creation of Uni. In this blog, we will focus on data modeling and design.
```

Reviewer: I like Create over Deploy here since there's nothing to "deploy" (in the sense of a distro) but take or leave this change as you see fit.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029339-3c97b4d4-e66a-4b37-ae21-6200e22cb042.png" />
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 3 - Uni Development Lifecycle Stages</p>

## Uni Schema Anatomy

Let’s imagine a simple Uni schema that provides a datastore for core customer data attributes. Figure 4 breaks the Uni schema into parts and tries to map it to concepts you use in a relational database. This will help you quickly get started on building your own Uni. 

<p align="center">

>   <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029529-fa688c30-766c-4803-bc59-3b953e3ae0c4.png" />

Reviewer 2: Not sure how closely you want the names in the figure to match reality. Keep in mind the queries and mutations generated by the compiler. For example, `Customers` will generate queries like `list_CustomersItems`. Using a singular `Customer` will generate more natural queries like `list_CustomerItems`.

</p>
<p align="center">Figure 4 - Example Customer Uni</p>

> ## Applying DDD to Uni 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Applying DDD to Vendia Share Unis
```

### Pattern 1: Single Domain, Single Bounded Context, and a Single Uni

This pattern is well suited for organizations who want to build small custom applications surrounding complex enterprise applications, or organizations who want to construct a new application to prove a new business idea. 

In this pattern, a Uni model contains a data model for a single bounded context. For example, the CRM team models customer account details in Bounded Context 1. 

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029629-68861fc8-daaf-4dc5-ab21-5269df0a5068.png" />
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 5 - Pattern 1</p>

> **You can use the below resources to practice and deploy pattern 1.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**You can use the below resources to practice and deploy Pattern 1.**
```

<details>
<summary>Schema</summary>

> [schema.json](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/7792069dd40c6822279305b201965685aaac5a08/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern1/schema/schema.json)

Reviewer 2: I recommend using the link to the main branch of the file. Also, I think you need to have a newline after `<summary>Schema</summary>` for the formatting to work as expected. There has to be a blank line between.

</details>
<details>

> <summary>Details and deployment instructions</summary>

Reviewer 2: Also, I think you need to have a newline after `<summary>Details and deployment instructions</summary>` for the formatting to work as expected. There has to be a blank line between.

> [README.md](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/vikrant-data-modeling-blog/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern1/README.md)

Reviewer 2: I recommend linking to the main version of the file.

</details>

### Pattern 2: Single Domain, Multiple Bounded Contexts, and a Single Uni

> This pattern is well suited for organizations who already have experience working with Uni and want to leverage existing Uni implementation in their organization with more custom and new applications. This model is also a good fit for new analytics focussed domains within the organization that has not built its software platform yet. These organizations can continue to operate lean by leveraging Uni owned by other domains with read-only copies of data for analytics and visualization. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This pattern is well suited for organizations that want to deploy new applications to leverage an existing Uni deployment in their organization. This model is also a good fit for new analytics-focused domains within the organization that have not built their software platforms yet. These organizations can leverage Unis owned by other domains with read-only copies of data for analytics and visualization.
```

> This pattern is well suited for organizations who already have experience working with Uni and want to leverage existing Uni implementation in their organization with more custom and new applications. This model is also a good fit for new analytics focussed domains within the organization that has not built its software platform yet. These organizations can continue to operate lean by leveraging Uni owned by other domains with read-only copies of data for analytics and visualization. 

Reviewer: A great use case here (and one we're having active customer conversations around) is building modern web/mobile applications that span many legacy systems.  Using Share as an aggregation point (through single or bi-directional adapters).  It makes multiple domains accessible under a single Graphql API, leading to much faster application development as a result.

Author: great point.

> In this pattern, a Uni contains data models for two bounded contexts. The Uni will have data models for two Bounded Contexts. For example, the CRM team manages customer account details in Bounded Context 1, and customer psychographic profile details in Bounded Context 2. Marketing wants a read-only copy of customer account details and customer psychographic profile details to power its customer analytics applications. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this pattern, an existing Uni contains data models for two Bounded Contexts. For example, the CRM team manages customer account details in Bounded Context 1 and customer psychographic profile details in Bounded Context 2. Marketing wants a read-only copy of customer account details and customer psychographic profile details to power its customer analytics applications. 
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029726-54cf57ba-f5ac-4e80-8f7e-6ca0901fce23.png" />
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 6 - Example Customer Uni</p>

**You can use the below resources to practice and deploy pattern 2.**
<details>

> <summary>Schema</summary>

Reviewer 2: Similar comment as earlier - make sure there is a blank line between the `<summary>` and text.

> [schema.json](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/7792069dd40c6822279305b201965685aaac5a08/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern2/schema/schema.json)

Reviewer 2: Similar comment - I recommend linking to the main version.

</details>

<details>

> <summary>Details and deployment instructions</summary>

Reviewer 2: Make sure there is a blank line between the `<summary>` and text.

> [README.md](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/vikrant-data-modeling-blog/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern2/README.md)

Reviewer 2: I recommend linking to the main version of the file.

</details> 

> ### Pattern 3: Two Different Domains, Same Bounded Context,  a Single Uni

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Pattern 3: Two Different Domains, Same Bounded Context, Single Uni
```

> This pattern is applicable for organizations where an existing domain has its own software systems but wants to leverage the Uni owned and operated by other domains for both read and write access on a small part of the domain data model. The intent is to scale as much as on the existing Uni owned by the other domains before spinning a dedicated Uni for the domain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This pattern is applicable for organizations where an existing domain has its own software systems but wants to leverage the Uni owned and operated by other domains for both read and write access on a small part of the domain data model. The intent is to scale as much as on the existing Uni owned by the other domains before creating a dedicated Uni for the domain.
```

> For Example, CRM and Marketing(Domain 2, Bounded Context 2) will need discrete write access permission boundaries between data managed by each.  You can still do it inside a single Uni. Create a node each for CRM and Marketing. You can configure write access on customer account aggregate for CRM on Node1 and configure write access on ‘CustomerProfile’ aggregate for Marketing on Node2. CRM will interact with Uni using Node 1 and Marketing will interact with Uni using Node 2. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Example, CRM and Marketing (Domain 2, Bounded Context 2) will need discrete write access permission boundaries between data managed by each.  You can still do it inside a single Uni by creating a separate node for CRM and Marketing. You can configure write access on `CustomerAccount` aggregate for CRM on Node1 and configure write access on `CustomerProfile` aggregate for Marketing on Node2. CRM will interact with the Uni using Node 1 and Marketing will interact with the Uni using Node 2. 
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029861-fb727977-4571-45f2-b719-a2b0051ad3cf.png" />
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 7 - Pattern 3</p>

**You can use the below resources to practice and deploy pattern 3.**
<details>

> <summary>Schema</summary>

Reviewer 2: Make sure there is a blank line between the `<summary>` and text.

[schema.json](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/7792069dd40c6822279305b201965685aaac5a08/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern3/schema/schema.json)
</details>

<details>

> <summary>Details and deployment instructions</summary>

Reviewer 2: Make sure there is a blank line between the `<summary>` and text.

> [README.md](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/vikrant-data-modeling-blog/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern3/README.md)

Reviewer 2: Link to the committed version of the file.

</details> 

### Pattern 4: Multiple Domains, Multiple Bounded Contexts, and Multiple Unis

This pattern is applicable to large enterprise customers with strong governance and control requirements for software owned and operated by each domain. You will also consider this pattern if the domain data model is complex, requires higher assurance and guarantee on throughput, or sensitivity of your domain justifies Uni level isolation. 

 

> For example, CRM and Marketing will need a dedicated Uni each because Marketing plans to bring more data from other domains that are not relevant for CRM and have different governance requirements for new data based on the sensitivity required for the newly acquired data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, CRM and Marketing will each need a dedicated Uni because Marketing plans to bring more data from other domains that are not relevant for CRM and have different governance requirements for new data based on the sensitivity of the newly acquired data. 
```

Author: committed change.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/96793170/151029967-905f78ff-efef-4a43-b3f2-ff5de0695542.png" />
</p>
<p align="center">Figure 8 - Pattern 4</p>

**You can use the below resources to practice and deploy pattern 4.**
<details>

> <summary>Schema</summary>

Reviewer 2: Make sure there is a blank line between the `<summary>` and text.

Author: accpeted

> [schema.json](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/7792069dd40c6822279305b201965685aaac5a08/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern4/schema/schema.json)

Reviewer 2: Link to the main version of the file.

Author: I will do it before committing.

</details>

<details>

> <summary>Details and deployment instructions</summary>

Reviewer 2: Make sure there is a blank line between the `<summary>` and text.

Author: accepted and committed

> [README.md](https://github.com/vendia/examples/blob/vikrant-data-modeling-blog/share/data-modeling/domain-driven-design/pattern3/README.md)

Reviewer 2: Link to the main version of the file.

</details> 

## Summary

> We would love to hear about how you applied the patterns in this blog to power your applications on Uni.

Reviewer: Can you add a stronger call to action?  Tweet to vendiahq?  LinkedIn share of your blog post?

Reviewer: Something that closes the loop between reader and us.

Author: I will check with TZ on this one.
